docs: "What's new in Svelte" April newsletter (#10907)
sveltejs/svelte: documentation/blog/2024-04-01-whats-new-in-svelte-april-2024.md

- **Breaking:** Slots inside templates with a `shadowrootmode` attribute are now preserved (**5.0.0-next.73**, [#10721](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10721))
- **Breaking:** The `$props()` no longer accepts a generic type argument. Instead, component authors should type their props like any other variable declaration (**5.0.0-next.76**, [#10694](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10694))
- A new reactive `Map` object acts just like a normal Map but it will keep reactivity for enumeration, and all its API methods (**5.0.0-next.79**, [Docs](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/runes#state-frozen-reactive-map-set-and-date), [#10803](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10803))
- The webkitdirectory DOM boolean attribute is now supported (**5.0.0-next.81**, [#10847](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10847))
- Form resets are now taken into account for two way bindings (**5.0.0-next.82**, [Docs](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/breaking-changes#other-breaking-changes-bindings-now-react-to-form-resets), [#10617](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10617))

> 

Reviewer: Maybe include $bindable? https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10851

Reviewer 2: Also there's a reactive Set too.

Author: Weird. I don't see bindable in the release notes. Added to this list anyway.

## What's new in SvelteKit

> Just bugfixes this month! For all the changes in kit, check out the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/main/packages/kit/CHANGELOG.md).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Just bugfixes this month! For all the changes in SvelteKit, check out the [CHANGELOG](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/blob/main/packages/kit/CHANGELOG.md).
```

> 

Reviewer 3: we actually had lots of exciting things this month!
- https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11987
- https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11800
- https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11732
- https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11653
- https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11945

Author: Thanks! not sure why i didn't see those :)

- [Tokenbase](https://github.com/mateoroldos/tokenbase) is a free tool for creating, managing and distributing Design Tokens. Easily create your Design Systems and export them to code in a few clicks.
- [MelloOS](https://mellobacon.github.io/mello_os/) is a fake OS desktop in the style of Windows 95
- [PowerHound](https://powderhound.io/) is an app for tracking snow conditions across Colorado's ski resorts and backcountry
- [ProductSurveys](https://productsurveys.io/) gathers user feedback directly inside your product
- [WAIfinder](https://github.com/nestauk/dsp_waifinder) is an interactive map shows entities operating in the AI industry in the UK
- [talkmedown](https://talkmedown.net/) is an emergency landing survival game using SvelteKit UI and Three.js graphics.
- [Bird Flapping](https://github.com/zonetecde/bird-flapping) is that game with a flapping bird (not to be confused with FlappyBird)
- [Minesweeper](https://codeberg.org/wires5210/minesweeper-funnymode) FUNNYMODE is minesweeper, but FUNNY
- [Routickr](https://www.routickr.com/) is a habit-tracking app with Firefox and Chrome extensions

> 

Reviewer 3: I learned that https://immich.app/ is written with SvelteKit

---
title: "What's new in Svelte: April 2024"

> description: 'Svelte Summit Spring on April 27! Plus: Maps, Dates and Sets'

Reviewer 3: maybe I'm overthinking this, but I wonder about rewording this slightly to leave off the s at the end of each word so that we use a word that matches the API
```suggestion
description: 'Svelte Summit Spring on April 27! Plus: reactive `Map`, `Date` and `Set`'
```

author: Dani Sandoval
authorURL: https://dreamindani.com
---

> Spring is just around the corner (for half the globe at least), which means [Svelte Summit Spring](https://www.sveltesummit.com/) is coming soon! The event will take place on April 27 and could feature you (yes you!). The call for proposals is happening now so submit a talk (or three!) at [this form](https://www.sveltesummit.com/2024/spring/submit).

Reviewer 3: I think the call for proposals has ended
```suggestion
Spring is just around the corner (for half the globe at least), which means [Svelte Summit Spring](https://www.sveltesummit.com/) is coming soon! The event will be streamed on [the Svelte Society YouTube channel](https://youtube.com/sveltesociety) on April 27.
```

Also, this month, a ton of new features have been merged into Svelte 5 to make it the best version of Svelte yet. We'll get into them all below, so let's jump right in!

## What's new in Svelte

[Svelte 5 is in preview](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/introduction) and gets closer to release every day. Below, you'll find some highlights from its [changelog](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/blob/main/packages/svelte/CHANGELOG.md):

> - The new `Map`, `Date` and `Set` classes can now be imported from svelte/reactivity and used just like their native counterparts to improve tree-shaking and make these objects fit better into Svelte's reactivity model (**5.0.0-next.79/67/76**,, [Docs](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/runes#state-frozen-reactive-map-set-and-date), [#10803](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10803), [#10622](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10622), [#10781](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10781))

Reviewer 3: the `5.0.0-next.79/67/76` syntax is a bit hard to read. maybe we should just say `5.0.0-next.79` since that's when they're all available?

- The new `$bindable` rune allows parents to `:bind` to a component's prop in addition to using them as regular props ([Docs](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/runes#props-bindable), [#10851](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10851)) 
- The webkitdirectory DOM boolean attribute is now supported (**5.0.0-next.81**, [#10847](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10847))
- Form resets are now taken into account for two way bindings (**5.0.0-next.82**, [Docs](https://svelte-5-preview.vercel.app/docs/breaking-changes#other-breaking-changes-bindings-now-react-to-form-resets), [#10617](https://github.com/sveltejs/svelte/pull/10617))

## What's new in SvelteKit

- `adapter-vercel` now has Skew Protection which ensures that the client and server stay in sync for any particular deployment (**@sveltejs/adapter-vercel@5.2.0**, [Docs](https://vercel.com/docs/deployments/skew-protection), [#11987](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11987))
- `adapter-vercel`'s build output files now include framework metadata - improving observability on the platform (**@sveltejs/adapter-vercel@5.2.0**, [#11800](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11800))

> - `adapter-cloudflare` and `adapter-cloudflare-workers` now include `adapter.emulate` which allows the adapter to influence the environment during dev, build and prerendering ([#11732](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11732))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `adapter-cloudflare` and `adapter-cloudflare-workers` now implement `adapter.emulate` which allows the adapter to emulate the Cloudflare platform during dev and preview ([#11732](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/pull/11732))
```
